#   Coursera Course - Getting and Cleaning Data - Course Assignment
###   By: John Costa
###   Date: July 23, 2020


Source data provided by Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, 
Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz [1]

 
## Study Design:
 

>The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an 
 ago ago bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, 
 WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a 
 smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer 
 and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular 
 velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded  
 to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned
 into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the 
 training data and 30% the test data. 

>The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying 
 noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 
 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has 
 gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth 
 low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force 
 is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 
 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was 
 obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 
 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

## INPUT - Source Data:

    Data was provided for the course Getting and CLeaning Data course week 4 
    assignment. See "UCI HAR Dataset".
    
    Data was generated by:
        Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
        Smartlab [1]

    Data was comprised of a Training and Test dataset located in the folder 
    "UCI HAR Dataset/data". Inertial Signals was ignored for Test and Train.

    
Units
      Frequency is measured in Hz
      Accelerometer is measured in g (m/s^2)
      Gyroscope is measured in radians/second

## PROCESS:


    The data was cleaned using the script "run_analysis.R"" in the following 
    stages:

###    STEP 1.    Load and clean labels and variable names into human readable format

        Field names were converted using _gsub_ as follows
          t -> time
          f -> frequency
          Acc -> Accelerometer
          Gyro -> Gyroscope
          arCoef -> AutorregresionCoefficients
  
        swapping activity codes for activity names
          1 -> walking
          2 -> walking upstairs
          3 -> walking downstairs
          4 -> sitting
          5 -> standing
          6 -> laying
      
        Removed underscores using _gsub_
    
        Moved all field and labels to lower case using _tolower_
      
###   STEP 2.     Assemble complete data set
        Combine Training and Test dataset using _cbind_ and _rbind_ into a single 
        table consisting of 563 fields and 10,299 records using the labels and
        names modified above. Clean up field names as needed to Tidy Data 
        standards.
    
###   STEP 3.     Extract data of interest
          Extract field names that are the mean and std for each measurment for 
          each activity by subject and calculate the mean of these measurements 
          (using  _aggregate_) for each subject, for each activity type and then
          arrange into the final format ordered by subject. The outcome produces
          180 records and 68 cols.
          
          Feild names are as follows:
            [1] Subject
            [2] Activity
            [3] MeanofSubjectActivity-<fieldname>mean...
            [4] MeanofSubjectActivity-<fieldname>std...
            :
            [180] MeanofSubjectActivity-<fieldname>std...
            
Subject data was averaged for each subject across each activity for 
every measurement using the _aggregate_ command where Subject and 
Activity were used as input variables.

**Note**: Variables with MeanFrequency were ignored
    
          
###    STEP 4.    Export / Save
          Data was saved to file (Ordered_MeanSubjectActivity.csv) using 
          _write.table_.



## OUTPUT (Ordered_MeanSubjectActivity.csv):

    The output file (Ordered_MeanSubjectActivity.csv) consists of the following:
      - An identifier of the subject who participated in the experiment.
      - Its activity label. 
      - A 180 - feature vector with means and STD of measurements from the 
      gyroscope and accelerometer. 

**Note:**
    - Each row represents the averaged measurement of each activity for each 
    subject over multiple observations.

###Measurement (column) description: 

>    The measuremnts are average of the mean and standard deviation from from 
    various meansurments of a 3 axis the accelerometer and gyroscope. These 
    time domain signals were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. and filtered 
    using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a 
    corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration 
    signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals 
    (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth 
    filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

>    Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were 
    derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and 
    tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional 
    signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, 
    tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

>    Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals 
    producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, 
    fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain 
    signals). 

>    These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for 
    each pattern:  

>    '-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

>    These measurements were then averaged for each subject over a given activity.

###Units
      Frequency is measured in Hz
      Accelerometer, Jerk are measured in m/s^2
      Gyroscope is measured in radians/second


###Each column was labeled accordingly:

***Subject [integer]:***
      -1-30

***Activity [character]:***
      -walking
      -walking upstairs
      -walking downstairs
      -sitting
      -standing
      -laying
    
***Means and STD of each of the following measurements (68 total) [numeric]:***
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometer.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometer.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometer.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometer.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometer.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometer.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometer.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometer.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometer.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometer.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometer.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometer.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscope.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscope.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscope.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscope.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscope.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscope.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometerMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeGravityAccelerometerMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerkMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerkMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerkMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerkMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.mean.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.mean.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.mean.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.std.X
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.std.Y
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.std.Z
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyBodyAccelerometerJerkMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyBodyAccelerometerJerkMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeMag.std
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeJerkMag.mean
      -MeanOfSubjectActivity-FrequencyBodyBodyGyroscopeJerkMag.std


    
### Units:
    
      Frequency is measured in Hz
      Accelerometer, Jerk are measured in g (m/s^2)
      Gyroscope is measured in radians/second
      
      
      
[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. 
Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass 
Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient 
Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012
